Frank Chien
Assignment 8 - de-identification
10/15/21

This script adapts the phone tagger patient information de-identification algorithm.
The chosen category for this assignment is 'locations'.
In the deid_phone function, instead of calling check_for_phone this script will call check_for_location
The check_for_location function represents my work.

Instead of the approach used in the PELR script, this assignment uses a natural language processing approach.
The strategy for location PHI identification is as follows
!) use location tagger to identify locations
2) use nltk part of speech tagging to identify proper nouns
3) The intersect of locations and proper nouns are flagged as location PHI

The reason why proper nouns were used as a requirement is because the words such as "home" or "hospital" would
represent (and correctly be tagged) as locations. However, do not offer identifiable patient information.
Locations such as "Calvert" or "Boston" for instance would be identifiable information and are proper nouns.

One difficulty this strategy encountered was the sensitivity and specificity of the strategy relies on the performance
of both the location tagger and the part of speech tagger. Since the input was medical documentation, which includes
specific language, syntax, sympbols, and abbreviations which are not seen in other domains of common English,the
natural language processing components had difficulty. For example, "Aline" was frequently tagged as a location, whereas
physicians/nurses would understand 'aline' as an arterial line, a piece of medical equipment. Another example is that
some notes were written in all-caps. The NLTK POS tagger relies on caplitalization to identify proper nouns, thus
for these notes, many tokens were incorrectly tagged as as 'NNP', or proper noun.

In summary, using a natural language processing approach to medical note deindification is a challenge due to the difficulty in parsing medical language with NLP tools,
which can be very different syntactically and in lexicon from common English.

Unfortunately, the performance of this NLP strategy as implemented is poor. Though the algorithm detected some locations correctly
(56 true positives), the number of false positives and false negatives were great (816, and 311, respectively). A large number of
tokens were incorrectly identified as a location (such as "aline") and further, incorrectly tagged as proper nouns.
This exercise has been a demonstration of both how medical record de-identification works, but also of the difficulty in
analyzing medical texts as natrual language.
 
The location tagger was obtained at
https://pypi.org/project/locationtagger/
"pip install location tagger" was run on terminal to install the location tagger
Following the instructions from the website, the command "python -m spacy download en" was required.
The location tagger is maintained by kaushiksoni10 and has an open source license
Per webiste, "OSI approved::MIT license"

Part of speech tagging was achieved throught he NLTK tagger pos_tag. 